<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV: The Evening of a Long Day</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Evening of a Long Day</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>That illustrious man and great national ornament, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle, continued his shining course. It began to be widely understood that one who had done society the admirable service of making so much money out of it, could not be suffered to remain a commoner. A baronetcy was spoken of with confidence; a peerage was frequently mentioned. Rumour had it that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle had set his golden face against a baronetcy; that he had plainly intimated to Lord Decimus that a baronetcy was not enough for him; that he had said, ‚ÄúNo‚ÅÝ‚Äîa Peerage, or plain Merdle.‚Äù This was reported to have plunged Lord Decimus as nigh to his noble chin in a slough of doubts as so lofty a person could be sunk. For the Barnacles, as a group of themselves in creation, had an idea that such distinctions belonged to them; and that when a soldier, sailor, or lawyer became ennobled, they let him in, as it were, by an act of condescension, at the family door, and immediately shut it again. Not only (said Rumour) had the troubled Decimus his own hereditary part in this impression, but he also knew of several Barnacle claims already on the file, which came into collision with that of the master spirit. Right or wrong, Rumour was very busy; and Lord Decimus, while he was, or was supposed to be, in stately excogitation of the difficulty, lent her some countenance by taking, on several public occasions, one of those elephantine trots of his through a jungle of overgrown sentences, waving <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle about on his trunk as Gigantic Enterprise, The Wealth of England, Elasticity, Credit, Capital, Prosperity, and all manner of blessings.</p>
			<p>So quietly did the mowing of the old scythe go on, that fully three months had passed unnoticed since the two English brothers had been laid in one tomb in the strangers‚Äô cemetery at Rome. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬Ýand <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler were established in their own house: a little mansion, rather of the Tite Barnacle class, quite a triumph of inconvenience, with a perpetual smell in it of the day before yesterday‚Äôs soup and coach-horses, but extremely dear, as being exactly in the centre of the habitable globe. In this enviable abode (and envied it really was by many people), <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler had intended to proceed at once to the demolition of the Bosom, when active hostilities had been suspended by the arrival of the Courier with his tidings of death. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, who was not unfeeling, had received them with a violent burst of grief, which had lasted twelve hours; after which, she had arisen to see about her mourning, and to take every precaution that could ensure its being as becoming as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle‚Äôs. A gloom was then cast over more than one distinguished family (according to the politest sources of intelligence), and the Courier went back again.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬Ýand <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler had been dining alone, with their gloom cast over them, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler reclined on a drawing-room sofa. It was a hot summer Sunday evening. The residence in the centre of the habitable globe, at all times stuffed and close as if it had an incurable cold in its head, was that evening particularly stifling. The bells of the churches had done their worst in the way of clanging among the unmelodious echoes of the streets, and the lighted windows of the churches had ceased to be yellow in the grey dusk, and had died out opaque black. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, lying on her sofa, looking through an open window at the opposite side of a narrow street over boxes of mignonette and flowers, was tired of the view. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, looking at another window where her husband stood in the balcony, was tired of that view. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, looking at herself in her mourning, was even tired of that view: though, naturally, not so tired of that as of the other two.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs like lying in a well,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, changing her position fretfully. ‚ÄúDear me, Edmund, if you have anything to say, why don‚Äôt you say it?‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler might have replied with ingenuousness, ‚ÄúMy life, I have nothing to say.‚Äù But, as the repartee did not occur to him, he contented himself with coming in from the balcony and standing at the side of his wife‚Äôs couch.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood gracious, Edmund!‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler more fretfully still, ‚Äúyou are absolutely putting mignonette up your nose! Pray don‚Äôt!‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, in absence of mind‚ÅÝ‚Äîperhaps in a more literal absence of mind than is usually understood by the phrase‚ÅÝ‚Äîhad smelt so hard at a sprig in his hand as to be on the verge of the offence in question. He smiled, said, ‚ÄúI ask your pardon, my dear,‚Äù and threw it out of window.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou make my head ache by remaining in that position, Edmund,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, raising her eyes to him after another minute; ‚Äúyou look so aggravatingly large by this light. Do sit down.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCertainly, my dear,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, and took a chair on the same spot.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf I didn‚Äôt know that the longest day was past,‚Äù said Fanny, yawning in a dreary manner, ‚ÄúI should have felt certain this was the longest day. I never did experience such a day.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs that your fan, my love?‚Äù asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, picking up one and presenting it.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúEdmund,‚Äù returned his wife, more wearily yet, ‚Äúdon‚Äôt ask weak questions, I entreat you not. Whose can it be but mine?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, I thought it was yours,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen you shouldn‚Äôt ask,‚Äù retorted Fanny. After a little while she turned on her sofa and exclaimed, ‚ÄúDear me, dear me, there never was such a long day as this!‚Äù After another little while, she got up slowly, walked about, and came back again.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy dear,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, flashing with an original conception, ‚ÄúI think you must have got the fidgets.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, Fidgets!‚Äù repeated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler. ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy adorable girl,‚Äù urged <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, ‚Äútry your aromatic vinegar. I have often seen my mother try it, and it seemingly refreshed her. And she is, as I believe you are aware, a remarkably fine woman, with no non‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood Gracious!‚Äù exclaimed Fanny, starting up again. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs beyond all patience! This is the most wearisome day that ever did dawn upon the world, I am certain.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler looked meekly after her as she lounged about the room, and he appeared to be a little frightened. When she had tossed a few trifles about, and had looked down into the darkening street out of all the three windows, she returned to her sofa, and threw herself among its pillows.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow Edmund, come here! Come a little nearer, because I want to be able to touch you with my fan, that I may impress you very much with what I am going to say. That will do. Quite close enough. Oh, you <em>do</em> look so big!‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler apologised for the circumstance, pleaded that he couldn‚Äôt help it, and said that ‚Äúour fellows,‚Äù without more particularly indicating whose fellows, used to call him by the name of Quinbus Flestrin, Junior, or the Young Man Mountain.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou ought to have told me so before,‚Äù Fanny complained.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy dear,‚Äù returned <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, rather gratified, ‚ÄúI didn‚Äôt know it would interest you, or I would have made a point of telling you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere! For goodness sake, don‚Äôt talk,‚Äù said Fanny; ‚ÄúI want to talk, myself. Edmund, we must not be alone any more. I must take such precautions as will prevent my being ever again reduced to the state of dreadful depression in which I am this evening.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy dear,‚Äù answered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler; ‚Äúbeing as you are well known to be, a remarkably fine woman with no‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, good <em>gracious</em>!‚Äù cried Fanny.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler was so discomposed by the energy of this exclamation, accompanied with a flouncing up from the sofa and a flouncing down again, that a minute or two elapsed before he felt himself equal to saying in explanation:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI mean, my dear, that everybody knows you are calculated to shine in society.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCalculated to shine in society,‚Äù retorted Fanny with great irritability; ‚Äúyes, indeed! And then what happens? I no sooner recover, in a visiting point of view, the shock of poor dear papa‚Äôs death, and my poor uncle‚Äôs‚ÅÝ‚Äîthough I do not disguise from myself that the last was a happy release, for, if you are not presentable you had much better die‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou are not referring to me, my love, I hope?‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler humbly interrupted.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúEdmund, Edmund, you would wear out a Saint. Am I not expressly speaking of my poor uncle?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou looked with so much expression at myself, my dear girl,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, ‚Äúthat I felt a little uncomfortable. Thank you, my love.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow you have put me out,‚Äù observed Fanny with a resigned toss of her fan, ‚Äúand I had better go to bed.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt do that, my love,‚Äù urged <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler. ‚ÄúTake time.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Fanny took a good deal of time: lying back with her eyes shut, and her eyebrows raised with a hopeless expression as if she had utterly given up all terrestrial affairs. At length, without the slightest notice, she opened her eyes again, and recommenced in a short, sharp manner:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat happens then, I ask! What happens? Why, I find myself at the very period when I might shine most in society, and should most like for very momentous reasons to shine in society‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI find myself in a situation which to a certain extent disqualifies me for going into society. It‚Äôs too bad, really!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy dear,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt think it need keep you at home.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúEdmund, you ridiculous creature,‚Äù returned Fanny, with great indignation; ‚Äúdo you suppose that a woman in the bloom of youth and not wholly devoid of personal attractions, can put herself, at such a time, in competition as to figure with a woman in every other way her inferior? If you do suppose such a thing, your folly is boundless.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler submitted that he had thought ‚Äúit might be got over.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGot over!‚Äù repeated Fanny, with immeasurable scorn.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFor a time,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler submitted.</p>
			<p>Honouring the last feeble suggestion with no notice, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler declared with bitterness that it really was too bad, and that positively it was enough to make one wish one was dead!</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHowever,‚Äù she said, when she had in some measure recovered from her sense of personal ill-usage; ‚Äúprovoking as it is, and cruel as it seems, I suppose it must be submitted to.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúEspecially as it was to be expected,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúEdmund,‚Äù returned his wife, ‚Äúif you have nothing more becoming to do than to attempt to insult the woman who has honoured you with her hand, when she finds herself in adversity, I think <em>you</em> had better go to bed!‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler was much afflicted by the charge, and offered a most tender and earnest apology. His apology was accepted; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler requested him to go round to the other side of the sofa and sit in the window-curtain, to tone himself down.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow, Edmund,‚Äù she said, stretching out her fan, and touching him with it at arm‚Äôs length, ‚Äúwhat I was going to say to you when you began as usual to prose and worry, is, that I shall guard against our being alone any more, and that when circumstances prevent my going out to my own satisfaction, I must arrange to have some people or other always here; for I really cannot, and will not, have another such day as this has been.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler‚Äôs sentiments as to the plan were, in brief, that it had no nonsense about it. He added, ‚ÄúAnd besides, you know it‚Äôs likely that you‚Äôll soon have your sister‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDearest Amy, yes!‚Äù cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler with a sigh of affection. ‚ÄúDarling little thing! Not, however, that Amy would do here alone.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler was going to say ‚ÄúNo?‚Äù interrogatively, but he saw his danger and said it assentingly, ‚ÄúNo, Oh dear no; she wouldn‚Äôt do here alone.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, Edmund. For not only are the virtues of the precious child of that still character that they require a contrast‚ÅÝ‚Äîrequire life and movement around them to bring them out in their right colours and make one love them of all things; but she will require to be roused, on more accounts than one.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs it,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler. ‚ÄúRoused.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPray don‚Äôt, Edmund! Your habit of interrupting without having the least thing in the world to say, distracts one. You must be broken of it. Speaking of Amy;‚ÅÝ‚Äîmy poor little pet was devotedly attached to poor papa, and no doubt will have lamented his loss exceedingly, and grieved very much. I have done so myself. I have felt it dreadfully. But Amy will no doubt have felt it even more, from having been on the spot the whole time, and having been with poor dear papa at the last; which I unhappily was not.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Here Fanny stopped to weep, and to say, ‚ÄúDear, dear, beloved papa! How truly gentlemanly he was! What a contrast to poor uncle!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFrom the effects of that trying time,‚Äù she pursued, ‚Äúmy good little Mouse will have to be roused. Also, from the effects of this long attendance upon Edward in his illness; an attendance which is not yet over, which may even go on for some time longer, and which in the meanwhile unsettles us all by keeping poor dear papa‚Äôs affairs from being wound up. Fortunately, however, the papers with his agents here being all sealed up and locked up, as he left them when he providentially came to England, the affairs are in that state of order that they can wait until my brother Edward recovers his health in Sicily, sufficiently to come over, and administer, or execute, or whatever it may be that will have to be done.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe couldn‚Äôt have a better nurse to bring him round,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler made bold to opine.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFor a wonder, I can agree with you,‚Äù returned his wife, languidly turning her eyelids a little in his direction (she held forth, in general, as if to the drawing-room furniture), ‚Äúand can adopt your words. He couldn‚Äôt have a better nurse to bring him round. There are times when my dear child is a little wearing to an active mind; but, as a nurse, she is Perfection. Best of Amys!‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, growing rash on his late success, observed that Edward had had, biggodd, a long bout of it, my dear girl.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf Bout, Edmund,‚Äù returned <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, ‚Äúis the slang term for indisposition, he has. If it is not, I am unable to give an opinion on the barbarous language you address to Edward‚Äôs sister. That he contracted Malaria Fever somewhere, either by travelling day and night to Rome, where, after all, he arrived too late to see poor dear papa before his death‚ÅÝ‚Äîor under some other unwholesome circumstances‚ÅÝ‚Äîis indubitable, if that is what you mean. Likewise that his extremely careless life has made him a very bad subject for it indeed.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler considered it a parallel case to that of some of our fellows in the West Indies with Yellow Jack. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler closed her eyes again, and refused to have any consciousness of our fellows of the West Indies, or of Yellow Jack.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSo, Amy,‚Äù she pursued, when she reopened her eyelids, ‚Äúwill require to be roused from the effects of many tedious and anxious weeks. And lastly, she will require to be roused from a low tendency which I know very well to be at the bottom of her heart. Don‚Äôt ask me what it is, Edmund, because I must decline to tell you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am not going to, my dear,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI shall thus have much improvement to effect in my sweet child,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler continued, ‚Äúand cannot have her near me too soon. Amiable and dear little Twoshoes! As to the settlement of poor papa‚Äôs affairs, my interest in that is not very selfish. Papa behaved very generously to me when I was married, and I have little or nothing to expect. Provided he had made no will that can come into force, leaving a legacy to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝGeneral, I am contented. Dear papa, dear papa.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She wept again, but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝGeneral was the best of restoratives. The name soon stimulated her to dry her eyes and say:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is a highly encouraging circumstance in Edward‚Äôs illness, I am thankful to think, and gives one the greatest confidence in his sense not being impaired, or his proper spirit weakened‚ÅÝ‚Äîdown to the time of poor dear papa‚Äôs death at all events‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat he paid off <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝGeneral instantly, and sent her out of the house. I applaud him for it. I could forgive him a great deal for doing, with such promptitude, so exactly what I would have done myself!‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler was in the full glow of her gratification, when a double knock was heard at the door. A very odd knock. Low, as if to avoid making a noise and attracting attention. Long, as if the person knocking were preoccupied in mind, and forgot to leave off.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHalloa!‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler. ‚ÄúWho‚Äôs this?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot Amy and Edward without notice and without a carriage!‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler. ‚ÄúLook out.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The room was dark, but the street was lighter, because of its lamps. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler‚Äôs head peeping over the balcony looked so very bulky and heavy that it seemed on the point of overbalancing him and flattening the unknown below.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs one fellow,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler. ‚ÄúI can‚Äôt see who‚ÅÝ‚Äîstop though!‚Äù</p>
			<p>On this second thought he went out into the balcony again and had another look. He came back as the door was opened, and announced that he believed he had identified ‚Äúhis governor‚Äôs tile.‚Äù He was not mistaken, for his governor, with his tile in his hand, was introduced immediately afterwards.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCandles!‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, with a word of excuse for the darkness.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs light enough for me,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle.</p>
			<p>When the candles were brought in, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle was discovered standing behind the door, picking his lips. ‚ÄúI thought I‚Äôd give you a call,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúI am rather particularly occupied just now; and, as I happened to be out for a stroll, I thought I‚Äôd give you a call.‚Äù</p>
			<p>As he was in dinner dress, Fanny asked him where he had been dining?</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle, ‚ÄúI haven‚Äôt been dining anywhere, particularly.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course you have dined?‚Äù said Fanny.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy‚ÅÝ‚Äîno, I haven‚Äôt exactly dined,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle.</p>
			<p>He had passed his hand over his yellow forehead and considered, as if he were not sure about it. Something to eat was proposed. ‚ÄúNo, thank you,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle, ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt feel inclined for it. I was to have dined out along with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle. But as I didn‚Äôt feel inclined for dinner, I let <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle go by herself just as we were getting into the carriage, and thought I‚Äôd take a stroll instead.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Would he have tea or coffee? ‚ÄúNo, thank you,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle. ‚ÄúI looked in at the Club, and got a bottle of wine.‚Äù</p>
			<p>At this period of his visit, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle took the chair which Edmund Sparkler had offered him, and which he had hitherto been pushing slowly about before him, like a dull man with a pair of skates on for the first time, who could not make up his mind to start. He now put his hat upon another chair beside him, and, looking down into it as if it were some twenty feet deep, said again: ‚ÄúYou see I thought I‚Äôd give you a call.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFlattering to us,‚Äù said Fanny, ‚Äúfor you are not a calling man.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo‚ÅÝ‚Äîno,‚Äù returned <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle, who was by this time taking himself into custody under both coat-sleeves. ‚ÄúNo, I am not a calling man.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou have too much to do for that,‚Äù said Fanny. ‚ÄúHaving so much to do, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle, loss of appetite is a serious thing with you, and you must have it seen to. You must not be ill.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh! I am very well,‚Äù replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle, after deliberating about it. ‚ÄúI am as well as I usually am. I am well enough. I am as well as I want to be.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The mastermind of the age, true to its characteristic of being at all times a mind that had as little as possible to say for itself and great difficulty in saying it, became mute again. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler began to wonder how long the mastermind meant to stay.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI was speaking of poor papa when you came in, sir.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAye! Quite a coincidence,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle.</p>
			<p>Fanny did not see that; but felt it incumbent on her to continue talking. ‚ÄúI was saying,‚Äù she pursued, ‚Äúthat my brother‚Äôs illness has occasioned a delay in examining and arranging papa‚Äôs property.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle; ‚Äúyes. There has been a delay.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot that it is of consequence,‚Äù said Fanny.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot,‚Äù assented <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle, after having examined the cornice of all that part of the room which was within his range: ‚Äúnot that it is of any consequence.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy only anxiety is,‚Äù said Fanny, ‚Äúthat <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝGeneral should not get anything.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú<em>She</em> won‚Äôt get anything,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle.</p>
			<p>Fanny was delighted to hear him express the opinion. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle, after taking another gaze into the depths of his hat as if he thought he saw something at the bottom, rubbed his hair and slowly appended to his last remark the confirmatory words, ‚ÄúOh dear no. No. Not she. Not likely.‚Äù</p>
			<p>As the topic seemed exhausted, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle too, Fanny inquired if he were going to take up <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle and the carriage in his way home?</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo,‚Äù he answered; ‚ÄúI shall go by the shortest way, and leave <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle to‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù here he looked all over the palms of both his hands as if he were telling his own fortune‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúto take care of herself. I dare say she‚Äôll manage to do it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúProbably,‚Äù said Fanny.</p>
			<p>There was then a long silence; during which, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, lying back on her sofa again, shut her eyes and raised her eyebrows in her former retirement from mundane affairs.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut, however,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle, ‚ÄúI am equally detaining you and myself. I thought I‚Äôd give you a call, you know.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCharmed, I am sure,‚Äù said Fanny.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSo I am off,‚Äù added <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle, getting up. ‚ÄúCould you lend me a penknife?‚Äù</p>
			<p>It was an odd thing, Fanny smilingly observed, for her who could seldom prevail upon herself even to write a letter, to lend to a man of such vast business as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle. ‚ÄúIsn‚Äôt it?‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle acquiesced; ‚Äúbut I want one; and I know you have got several little wedding keepsakes about, with scissors and tweezers and such things in them. You shall have it back tomorrow.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúEdmund,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler, ‚Äúopen (now, very carefully, I beg and beseech, for you are so very awkward) the mother of pearl box on my little table there, and give <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle the mother of pearl penknife.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThank you,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle; ‚Äúbut if you have got one with a darker handle, I think I should prefer one with a darker handle.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTortoiseshell?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThank you,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle; ‚Äúyes. I think I should prefer tortoiseshell.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Edmund accordingly received instructions to open the tortoiseshell box, and give <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle the tortoiseshell knife. On his doing so, his wife said to the master-spirit graciously:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will forgive you, if you ink it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll undertake not to ink it,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle.</p>
			<p>The illustrious visitor then put out his coat-cuff, and for a moment entombed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler‚Äôs hand: wrist, bracelet, and all. Where his own hand had shrunk to, was not made manifest, but it was as remote from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSparkler‚Äôs sense of touch as if he had been a highly meritorious Chelsea Veteran or Greenwich Pensioner.</p>
			<p>Thoroughly convinced, as he went out of the room, that it was the longest day that ever did come to an end at last, and that there never was a woman, not wholly devoid of personal attractions, so worn out by idiotic and lumpish people, Fanny passed into the balcony for a breath of air. Waters of vexation filled her eyes; and they had the effect of making the famous <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMerdle, in going down the street, appear to leap, and waltz, and gyrate, as if he were possessed of several Devils.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
